## Framework for the NAP

### Essential Functions of the NAP Process
The process to embed adaptation into national policies has advanced in both developed and developing countries. Substantial headway has been made in the development 
of climate change adaptation (CCA) strategies and plans, which include legislation and national strategies. The National Adaptation Plan (NAP) for Sao Tome and 
Principe will follow a dynamic, iterative approach that imparts elements of continuous learning and improvement. Key to this, is the collection of lessons learned 
from community-based activities that will address the context-specific elements of climate change adaptation together with emerging barriers and limits to 
adaptation. Indeed, there is no single approach to adaptation planning due to the multifarious nature of adaptation, and more often a mixed approach of both top-
down and bottom-up interactions occurs.

The ultimate objective for Sao Tome and Principe’s adaptation planning process is to shift from a project-based system towards a coordinated and coherent approach, 
across key vulnerable sectors and at all levels. Linkages with local, subnational and national levels of government, incorporating the full participation of a broad 
range of stakeholders is imperative. Such approaches that lean on the traditional knowledge and technical expertise of the Saotomean society from national 
government officials and stakeholders to civil society organizations, academia and private sector actors, will stimulate dynamic responses in terms of climate 
change adaptation options and advance societal goals.

While national governments largely adopt a coordinating role in adaptation planning and implementation, at the state and local levels climate change adaptation 
responses have diverse processes and outcomes (Mimura et al., n.d.). Local actors face the complexity of adaptation with insufficient technical guidance and data on 
local vulnerabilities and potential impacts. Yet given the availability of information, local agencies and planners are inundated with adaptation options needed to 
address future climatic changes (Mimura et al., n.d.). This, coupled with the uncertain outcomes of their decisions and the complexities of dynamic interlocked 
systems, highlights the importance of strengthening vertical linkages within government and horizontal nodes between sectors, actors and policies functioning at 
comparable levels. Furthermore, enhanced action on adaptation should follow a country-driven, gender-sensitive, participatory approach, guided by the best available 
science and indigenous knowledge, taking into consideration vulnerable groups, communities and ecosystems (National Adaptation Plans, 2012).

### The NAP as the umbrella programme for adaptation
The NAP process in Sao Tome and Principe proposes a measured approach towards transforming the country’s ability to address climate change adaptation. In spite of 
gaps such as the lack of a comprehensive institutional framework to set up a coordinated and cross-sectoral approach to adaptation, and the need for a national 
investment plan to guide climate change adaptation investments, the NAP is veritably integral to ensure a cohesive approach to adaptation planning at all levels. 
The NAP intends to act as an umbrella programme for all climate change adaptation initiatives, projects and programs. It will enrich the collective actions 
undertaken and bridge the gaps with respect to climate data and information, capacity building, policy mainstreaming, adaptation finance and monitoring2. In Sao Tome and Principe, the current institutional framework to support climate change adaptation include the following actors and their corresponding areas of work:
INSERT TABLE HERE
The NAP intends to build on Sao Tome and Principe’s third National Communication, which complements the adaptation measures recommended in the previous versions of 
the National Communication, as well as the NAPA and other relevant strategic documents. It will undertake scientific analysis on local vulnerabilities and climate 
change impacts in key sectors of the economy, including agriculture and livestock, water resources and coastal zones, among others.
