## Climate Change Adaptation Assessment

The principal objective of the climate change adaptation assessment of key systems is to identify and assess key vulnerabilities, hazards and risks for the country 
and provide analysis on emerging trends and future climate scenarios. A key outcome of the assessment is the promotion of priority adaptation actions, projects and 
programs that respond to the current and future impacts of climate change on natural and human systems, taking into consideration the specific needs of local 
communities and vulnerable groups. Each of the mega systems identified, center on key areas critical to the advancement of Sao Tome and Principe’s sustainable 
development pathway

The climate system in Sao Tome and Principe is influenced by the annual migration and dynamics of the Inter Tropical Convergence Zone (ITCZ). The climate is 
characterized as complex on the basis of it being a small archipelago endowed with a unique orography. Air temperature and rainfall data are only available at five 
meteorological stations, four stations are situated in Sao Tome and one in Principe. In effect, only the Sao Tome Airport weather station can detect climate change 
due to its longer time series data compared to other meteorological stations across the island with data series of less than a decade.

The Representative Concentration Pathways (RCPs), which involve four different 21st century pathways of GHG emissions and atmospheric concentrations, air pollutant 
emissions and land use8, were used to project their effects on key climate-related systems. The RCPs help project the impacts under various climate scenarios and 
are useful for the country’s climate change adaptation assessment. The RCP scenarios detailed in this NAP, which include the intermediate scenario (RCP4.5) and the 
very high GHG emissions scenario (RCP8.5), are compared to the baseline scenario which represents a pathway without additional efforts to constrain emissions.

### Exposure to Climate Impacts and Risks
#### Current Climate (Baseline):
Sao Tome and Principe is among 13 countries uniquely situated along the equator. Its characterized by a humid tropical climate with two seasons: a shorter dry 
season (gravana), which lasts approximately three months from June to August and a longer rainy season that extends to nine months from September to May. The 
seasons are influenced by the location of the Inter-Tropical Convergence Zone (ITCZ), which significantly affects rainfall in many equatorial countries. Longer term 
shifts in the ITCZ can lead to extreme droughts or flooding in neighboring regions. The ITCZ migrates from the southern hemisphere to the North, causing the peak of 
the rainy season to occur on average from February to May and then again from October to December when the ITCZ migrates back south. The period of roughly two 
months between December and January, referred to as Gravanito, experiences a slight reduction in rainfall.

Given the characteristics of the archipelago, Sao Tome and Principe has an average surface temperature of 25.6° C and high levels of humidity that can reach over 
90% at higher altitudes. The country has many microclimates predominately as a function of rainfall, temperature and topographical relief. It therefore follows 
that temperatures drop as altitude increases. This is the case for Pico de Sao Tome which sits at an elevation of 2024m in the central west part of the island 
and Pico de Principe at an altitude of 948m in the southern region. The country’s orographic precipitation is determined by the volcanic massifs that result in 
rainfall gradients, which offer significant water potential. Average annual rainfall is 2000-3000 mm/year. The highest annual average rainfall of 7000mm is 
recorded in the southwest region of the island of Sao Tome (Quijá and Xufe-xufe river basins), which is home to dense tropical forests. The savanna is located in 
the northeastern parts of the island, where rainfall is measured at an annual average of below 1000mm. Parts of the northern regions of the island, namely the 
districts of Água Grande and Lobata, experience an average monthly rainfall of below 50mm during gravana. There are marked complexities of engaging in 
horticulture without irrigation, particularly in light of the fact that the highest population densities are situated in these regions.

Both the island of Sao Tome and the island of Principe are dealing with the impacts of climate change and extreme weather events. The country continues to be 
impacted by natural hazards, which include coastal and river flash floods, storms and droughts. Frequent flash floods and severe storms occur with high 
incidences of hail, lightening and strong winds that threaten the country. The sectors most affected by very frequent events are the services and agriculture 
sectors, which are impacted less than once every decade10. Under the current climate, 23 000 people on average, representing 12% of the total population in 2016, 
are annually affected by droughts and affected livestock (i.e., animals living in areas hit by droughts) represent 14% of the total livestock. Beyond this, under 
both present and future climates, physical crop losses are centered around four crops (banana, coconut, oil palm and taro).

#### Emerging Climate Trends:
Warming of temperatures and reductions in rainfall are of paramount importance to Saotomeans as this can decrease the river flow and influence the availability 
of subterranean water. In certain regions of Sao Tome and Principe climate impacts such as sea-level rise, flooding and coastal erosion have been observed at 
levels that risk damage and destruction to major infrastructure. According to the baseline, RCP4.5 and RCP8.5 scenarios, the annual average temperature trend 
reported by Sao Tome Airport’s weather station, indicated an increase of 0.6 °C between 1960 and 2016, representing an average warming of around 0.01 °C per 
year. The warming comes into effect from the months of October until May. The highest annual average temperature of 26.2 °C was recorded in 1998, whereas the 
lowest annual average temperature of 24.7 °C was recorded in 1964. This demonstrates an increase in interannual variability of the climate in Sao Tome and 
Principe. Notably, the five warmest years to-date have occurred in the last 20 years, which further indicates an increasing trend of warming of annual average 
temperatures. Parallel to other countries in West Africa, temperature observations in Sao Tome and Principe reveal an increasing trend. The figures below, based 
on climate analysis from 1970 to 2015, demonstrate an average increase in temperature. Trends in average annual precipitation, however, are not clearly defined 
and are variable in time and space.

INSERT IMAGES HERE

#### Future Climate Scenarios: Projected Future Climate
A climate-based study on Sao Tome and Principe detailed in the Third National Communication, observed changes in total rainfall during the rainy season and dry 
season for the 2041–2070 period. In the RCP4.5 scenario, rainfall projections predict a rainier climate from October to May (rainy season) and normal to dry 
conditions from June to September (dry season). In the RCP8.5 scenario, projections indicate a reduction in rainfall for both rainy and dry periods, with the 
exception of December and January based on a monthly analysis, which demonstrates an increase in rainfall on the island of Sao Tome. This stands in contrast to 
the country’s gravanito period under the baseline scenario where rainfall typically decreases in the months of December and January. In terms of climate 
extremes, projections show a surge in total annual rainfall under RCP4.5 and an increase in rainfall intensity under both scenarios, particularly in the Caué and 
Lembá districts in the southwestern region of the island of Sao Tome. Further to this, there is a rise in the number of consecutive dry days that signals a 
prolonged dry season (gravana) and uneven temporal distribution of rainfall in the region. With respect to extreme temperature, climate projections under both scenarios (RCP4.5 and RCP8.5) indicate warming, with a surge in heat waves on hot days and an increase in annual minimum temperatures.

INSERT IMAGES HERE

Under future climate conditions and with the inclusion of socio-economic projections, GDP impacted by droughts (i.e., the economic value produced in areas hit by 
droughts) could rise to USD $600 million13. The number of affected livestock is projected to marginally decline relative to current climate conditions. The 
agricultural production losses owing to droughts are projected to drop under future climate conditions for all six crops of banana, coconut, cocoa, fruits, palm 
oil and taro. Under future climate conditions, the agricultural loss decreases in both islands. Moreover, sea level is projected to rise by 0.13- 0.56 meters by 
2090 compared to average levels over the 1980-1999 period14. Fishermen will be increasingly exposed to climate variability and will continue to be affected by 
the diminution of marine resources due to disruptions to coastal ecosystems, destruction of mangroves and increases in storms and other natural hazards.

#### Regional Projections:
As it concerns regional projections, under RCP4.5, global models predict an increase in rainfall in West Africa between the months of October to March. There is 
a variation in rainfall of about 10% to 20% over the 1986-2005 reference period. The climate models for the periods 2016–2035, 2046–2065, and 2081–2100 indicate 
that changes in temperature are consistent across the models. In the middle of the 21st century, specifically for the years 2046–2065, the average temperature 
increase ranges from 1° to 2°C in the Gulf of Guinea. A slight increase in average rainfall for the period 2036–2065 is observed, particularly from May to 
September during gravana in the Gulf of Guinea, including the islands of Sao Tome and Principe.

INSERT IMAGES HERE

#### Local Projections:
Local climate change projections for the 2041–2070 period is based on the 1971–2000 period, for which projections indicate warming of temperatures in the study 
belt, principally from October to May. During gravana warming is more pronounced in the central region of Sao Tome, where the altitude is highest. All in all, 
warming trends under both RCP4.5 and RCP8.5 is comparable, with an increase in intensity of warming in the RCP8.5 scenario. The local projections estimated for 
both islands on the basis of the ETA model, predict an increase in temperature of approximately 2.5 °C under RCP4.5 and 3°C in RCP8.5 in both rainy and dry 
periods. For both the rainy season and dry season under both scenarios, local scale projections do not demonstrate changes in annual temperature across the 
islands of Sao Tome and Principe.

### Assessment by Key Systems
#### Agriculture
The agriculture sector is integral to Sao Tome and Principe’s national economy and its vulnerability to climate change is captured, in part, by thermal stresses 
to the environment. Considering that subsistence agriculture in the country is narrowly characterized by its fragility and poor planning techniques, it tends to 
import a large portion of its food for consumption. In Sao Tome and Principe, subsistence agriculture crop production consists of taro, corn, tomato, cassava, 
pineapple and breadfruit, among other crops. Its food commodity markets focus on the export trade of cocoa, coconut, coffee (Robusta and Arabica), flowers, 
vanilla, chili pepper and palm oil. On the whole, the agriculture sector employs 60% of the labor force but represents only 22.4% of GDP16. With respect to food 
security and access, 10% of households have low food consumption and 12.6% of households have limited food consumption.

#### Priority Area: Cocoa (Theobroma cacao L.) Production
At the turn of the century, Sao Tome and Principe was one of the global leaders in the production of cocoa beans. Among myriad factors, the tropical climate, 
heavy rainfall, and the fertile volcanic soils gave rise to the rapid development of cocoa plantations called roças. Sao Tome and Principe’s cocoa is recognized 
for its superior quality and a burgeoning organic cocoa sector. Cocoa production constitutes a main share of the agriculture sector, accounting for roughly 17% 
of the Gross Domestic Product (GDP)17 as the main export commodity produced on plantations. Following the progressive redistribution of sizeable cocoa 
plantations at the outset of the 1990s, small farmers assumed responsibility of a majority of cocoa production as colonial plantations were nationalized. Cocoa 
farmers supplemented their income by producing additional crops such as vegetables, fruits, vanilla and pepper for trade. As a consequence of the 1998 
international cocoa price crash, producers realized that cocoa production would not secure their livelihoods. Studies later suggested that combining organic 
cocoa production and fair-trade principles would improve farmers income. Notwithstanding the substantial contribution of cocoa to the domestic economy, its 
export share now comprises a negligible share of the global cocoa market.
